.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd Mon Aug 27 2025               \" DATE 
.Dt StorageDEHelper 8      \" Program name and manual section number
.Os MacOSX
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify 
.Nm StorageDEHelper
-- Helper daemon for storage statistics
.\" The following lines are read in generating the apropos(man -k) database. Use only key
.\" words here as the database is built based on the words here and in the .ND line. 
.\".Nm Other_name_for_same_program(),
.\".Nm Yet another name for the same program.
.\" Use .Nm macro to designate other names for the documented program.
.\".Nd This line parsed for whatis database.
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
is a helper daemon which uses applessdstatistics to gather statistics related to the internal storage device.
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS       \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -diag
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .El
.Sh SEE ALSO 
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.\" .Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs 
.\" .Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner
