.\" Copyright (c) 2025, Apple, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd April 15, 2022
.Dt FOOTPRINT 1
.Os "OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm footprint
.Nd gathers memory information about one or more processes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl j Ar path
.Op Fl f Ar bytes|formatted|pages
.Op Fl -sort Ar column
.Op Fl p Ar name|pid
.Op Fl x Ar name|pid
.Op Fl t
.Op Fl s
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl y
.Op Fl w
.Op Fl -swapped
.Op Fl -wired
.Op Fl a
.Ar process-name | pid | memgraph
.Op ...
.Nm
.Fl -sample Ar interval
.Ar ...
.Nm
.Fl h , Fl -help
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility gathers and displays memory consumption information for the specified processes or memory graph files.
.Pp
.Nm
will display all addressable memory used by the specified processes, but it emphasizes memory considered
.Qq dirty
by the operating system kernel for purposes of accounting.  If multiple
processes are specified,
.Nm
will de-duplicate multiply-mapped objects and will display shared objects
separately from private ones.  It will also print a summary of total
de-duplicated footprint.  Currently,
.Nm
does not de-duplicate wired memory shared between the
.Ar kernel_task
address space and user space processes.
.Pp
.Nm
must be run as root when inspecting processes that are not owned by the current user.
.Pp
Processes are specified using a PID, exact process name, or partial process name.  Memory information will be displayed for all processes matching any provided name.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a , Fl -all
target all processes and report system-level auxiliary data
.It Fl -sysFootprint
print system-level auxiliary data
.It Fl j , Fl -json Ar path
also save a JSON representation of the data to the specified path
.It Fl f , Fl -format Ar bytes|formatted|pages
textual output should be formatted in
.Ar bytes , Ar pages ,
or human-readable
.Ar formatted
(default)
.It Fl -sort Ar column
textual output should be sorted by the given column name, for example
.Ar Dirty
(default),
.Ar Clean ,
.Ar Category ,
etc.
.It Fl p , Fl -proc Ar name
target the given process by name (can be used multiple times)
.It Fl p , Fl -pid Ar pid
target the given process by pid (can be used multiple times)
.It Fl x , Fl -exclude Ar name/pid
exclude the given process by name or pid (can be used multiple times)
.Pp
often used with
.Fl -all
to exclude some processes from analysis
.It Fl t , Fl -targetChildren
in addition to the supplied processes, target their children, grandchildren, etc.
.It Fl s , Fl -skip
skip processes that the system has determined are
.Qq idle
or
.Qq clean
due to having no outstanding XPC transactions.
.It Fl -minFootprint Ar MiB
skip processes with footprint less than the provided minimum MiB.
.It Fl -forkCorpse
analyze a forked corpse of the target process rather than the original process.  Due to system resource limits on corpses this argument is not compatible with
.Fl -all
or if attempting to analyze more than a couple processes.
.It Fl v
display all regions and vmmap-like output of address space layout.  Without
this flag, the default output is a summary of the totals for each memory
category.
.It Fl w , Fl -wide
show wide output with all columns and full paths (implies
.Fl -swapped Fl -wired )
.It Fl -swapped
show swapped/compressed column
.It Fl -wired
show wired memory column
.It Fl -vmObjectDirty
interpret dirty memory as viewed by Virtual Memory subsystem (VM) objects in the kernel, rather than the default behavior which interprets dirty memory through the pmap.  This mode may calculate a total footprint that does not match what is shown in other tools such as
.Xr top 1
or Activity Monitor.app.  However, it can provide insight into dirty memory that is by design not included in the default mode, such as dirty file-backed memory or a VM region mapped into a process that is normally accounted to only the process that created it.
.Pp
The
.Fl -vmObjectDirty
mode was the default in versions prior to macOS 10.15.
.It Fl -unmapped
search all processes for memory owned by the target processes but not mapped into their address spaces (see the discussion in
.Sx MEMORY ACCOUNTING
for more details)
.It Fl -sample Ar interval
Start
.Nm
in sampling mode, gathering data every
.Ar interval
seconds (which can be fractional like 0.5).  Text output will be a concatenation of usual text output with added timestamps.  JSON output will contain a
.Sq samples
array with many of the same key/values that would normally be at the top level.  All other command line options are also supported in sampling mode.
.It Fl -sample-duration Ar duration
Time limit on the number of seconds to sample when combined with
.Fl -sample .
When this flag is omitted or set to 0, sampling continues until <ctrl-c>.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
display help and exit
.El
.Sh COLUMNS
.Bl -tag -width "Reclaimable"
Column names in parentheses indicate that they are a subset of one or
more non-parenthesized columns.
.It Dirty
Memory that has been written to and is neither backed by a file nor marked
reclaimable.  It includes
.Qq (Swapped)
memory, purgeable memory marked non-volatile, and memory written to
implicitly, such as zero-filled.  A process's
.Qq footprint
is equal to the total of all Dirty memory associated with that process.
.It (Swapped)
A subset of Dirty memory that has been compressed or swapped to storage
by the kernel.
.It Clean
Resident memory which is neither reclaimable nor dirty with respect to a
particular process.  Shared dirty memory billed to only one process will
show up in this column for process(es) to which it is not billed.  Dirty
memory deliberately excluded from a process's footprint is also reported
here.  In this case,
.Sq (nofootprint)
is added to the Category column and the Dirty column will always report
zero bytes.  See
.Sx nofootprint Memory
below.
.It Reclaimable
Resident memory that has been explicitly marked as available for reuse.  For example, memory can be marked reclaimable when it is purgeable and marked volatile (including purgeable empty) or by using
.Xr madvise 2
with
.Sy MADV_FREE Ns .
Reclaimable memory can be taken away from a process at any time in response
to system memory pressure.
.It (Wired)
Dirty memory that must stay at a fixed location in physical RAM.  For
example, when a process uses the GPU, the driver places graphics textures
into memory and then shares that memory with the GPU.  The GPU needs to
be able to independently read from this memory without synchronizing with
the VM subsystem running on the CPU.
.It Regions
The count of VM regions contributing to this entry.  For display purposes,
each binary segment in the shared cache region is considered a separate
region.
.It Category
A descriptive name for this entry, such as a human-readable name for a VM_MEMORY_* tag, a path to a mapped file, or a segment of a loaded binary.
.El
.Sh INVESTIGATING MEMORY FOOTPRINT
.Nm footprint
provides an efficient calculation of a process's memory impact and a high-level overview of the various categories of memory contributing to that footprint.  The details that it provides can be used as a starting point in an investigation.
.Pp
Prioritize reducing dirty memory.  Dirty memory cannot be automatically
reclaimed by the kernel and an accounting of it (described below) is
directly used by various parts of the OS as a measure of a process's
contribution to system memory pressure.
.Pp
Next focus on reducing Reclaimable memory, especially purgeable memory
marked volatile which will become dirty when marked non-volatile.  Although
this memory can be cheaply reclaimed by the kernel, purgeable memory
marked volatile is commonly used as a cache of data that may be expensive
for a user process to recreate: for example, decoded image data.
.Pp
Clean memory can also be cheaply reclaimed by the kernel, but unlike
reclaimable memory, it can generally be restored automatically.  For
example, file-backed memory, even if dirty, can be automatically evicted
from memory and re-read from disk on demand.  Having too much clean memory
can still be a performance problem, since large working sets can cause
thrashing when a process accesses large amounts of clean memory when there
is not enough physical memory readily available to store it.
.Pp
Avoid using Wired memory as much as possible: it cannot be paged out,
compressed, or otherwise reclaimed.
.Ss Memory Categories
.Pp
.Bl -ohang
.It Sy malloc(3) memory
Memory allocated by
.Xr malloc 3
is one of the most common forms of memory, making up what is usually referred to as the
.Qq heap .
This memory will have a category prefixed with
.Sq MALLOC_ .
.Xr malloc 3
allocates VM regions on a process's behalf; the contents of those regions will be the individual allocations representing objects and data in a process.  Refer to the
.Xr heap 1
tool to further categorize the objects contained within a malloc memory region, or
.Xr leaks 1
to detect a subset of heap memory that is no longer reachable.
.It Sy Binary segments
Loaded binaries will be visible as an entry with both the segment type and the path to the binary, most often __TEXT, __DATA, or __LINKEDIT segments.  Non-shared cache binaries and pages in the __DATA segment (such as those that contain modified global variables) can often have dirty memory.
.It Sy Mapped files
File-backed memory allocated using
.Xr mmap 2
will show up as
.Sq mapped file
along with the path to the file.
.It Sy VM allocations
Most other types of memory can be tagged with a name that indicates what subsystem allocated the region (see
.Xr mmap 2
for more information).  For instance, Foundation.framework may allocate memory and tag it with VM_MEMORY_FOUNDATION, which appears in
.Nm footprint Ns 's
output as
.Sq Foundation .
Processes are able to allocate memory with their own tags by using an appropriate tag in the range VM_MEMORY_APPLICATION_SPECIFIC_1 - VM_MEMORY_APPLICATION_SPECIFIC_16.  Memory which does not fall into one of the previous categories and has not been explicitly tagged will be marked
.Sq untagged (VM_ALLOCATE) .
.El
.Pp
For malloc and VM allocated memory, details about when and where the memory was allocated can often be obtained by enabling MallocStackLogging and using
.Xr malloc_history 1
to view the backtrace at the time of each allocation.  Xcode.app and Instruments.app also provide visual tools for debugging memory, such as the Xcode's Memory Graph Debugger.
.Pp
.Xr vmmap 1
provides a similar view to
.Nm footprint ,
but with an emphasis on displaying the raw metrics returned by the kernel rather than the simplified and more processed view of
.Nm footprint .
One important difference is that
.Xr vmmap 1 Ns 's
.Qq DIRTY
column does not include the compressed or swapped memory found in the
.Qq SWAPPED
column.  Additionally,
.Xr vmmap 1
can only operate on a single process and contains additional information such as a malloc zone summary.
.Sh MEMORY ACCOUNTING
Determining what dirty memory should and should not be accounted to a
process is a difficult problem.  Memory can be shared amongst processes.
It is sometimes allocated by one process on behalf of another.  No matter
how the accounting is done, accuracy is often expensive.
.Pp
Many operating systems have historically exposed memory metrics such as
virtual size (VSIZE) and resident size (RSIZE/RPRVT/RSS/etc.).  These
metrics are useful but not great indicators of the amount of physical
memory (RAM) required by a process.  For instance, virtual size includes
allocations that may not require any physical memory at all, and resident
size includes clean and volatile purgeable memory that can be reclaimed
by the kernel
.Po see
.Sx INVESTIGATING MEMORY FOOTPRINT
.Pc .
.Pp
It can be more accurate to measure the dirty memory associated with the
VM objects mapped into a process.  This is the approach taken by
.Fl -vmObjectDirty ,
but it is expensive and cannot be done in real time.
.Ss Physical Footprint
.Pp
To estimate how much RAM is used by each process at any given moment,
Apple platforms track
.Qq physical footprint
using a per-process kernel ledger.  The kernel updates this value as dirty
pages are faulted into and removed from process address spaces.  This
ledger is cheap to query, suitably accurate, and provides features which
help implement system memory policies.  It tracks peak memory, triggers
actions when a process exceeds a memory limit, and can charge a process
for memory that is not mapped into it.  Most other diagnostic tools, such
as the
.Sq MEM
column in
.Xr top 1 ,
the
.Sq Memory
column in Activity Monitor.app, and the Memory Debug Gauge in Xcode.app
all report values from the process footprint ledger.
.Pp
.Nm footprint Ns 's
default output strives to provide an accurate breakdown of dirty memory
which matches the value reported by the ledger.  The ledger value itself
is also reported as
.Sy phys_footprint
under
.Qq Auxiliary data
for each process.
.Pp
The definition of the footprint ledger is complicated and subject to
change.  It includes values from multiple sub-ledgers, such as network
memory, graphics memory, etc.  When a memory allocation is recorded in
one of these sub-ledgers,
.Nm footprint
will append its name to the Category column.  For example,
.Sq IOKit (graphics)
or
.Sq Owned physical footprint (unmapped) (media) .
.Ss Owned Unmapped Memory
.Pp
When a portion of assigned footprint is not mapped into a process's address
space,
.Nm footprint
will only be able to report the memory as
.Sq Owned physical footprint (unmapped) .
If this memory is mapped into another process, the
.Fl -unmapped
argument can be used to search all processes for a mapping of the same
VM object(s).  Investigating these other processes and their mappings
will often provide more information about the memory.  Because
.Fl -all
reports memory shared amongst all processes, it implicitly performs the
same function.  Any memory still listed as
.Sq (unmapped)
after using
.Fl -unmapped
.Pq or Fl -all
is unlikely to be mapped into any process and is likely to be only
referenced by the kernel or drivers.
.Ss nofootprint Memory
.Pp
Sometimes, memory dirtied on behalf of a process is deliberately excluded
from its footprint.  One reason this happens is that some system component,
perhaps a hardware driver, needs to allocate memory on behalf of a process,
but the process doesn't directly control the size of the allocation.  This
policy prevents processes from hitting their memory limits due to factors
beyond their control.  This memory is still dirty and can be identified
by
.Sq (nofootprint)
in the category name.
.Pp
.Ss kernel_task Memory
.Nm
approximates
.Ar kernel_task
memory by reporting system wired memory broken down by kernel VM tag.
This is the same information provided by
.Xr zprint 1 Ns ,
except that
.Nm
does not count
.Sq VM_KERN_MEMORY_MLOCK
memory towards
.Ar kernel_task Ns 's
estimated footprint.  The first limitation of this approach is that
.Nm
does not report any unwired memory private to
.Ar kernel_task Ns .
.Pp
When
.Ns non- Ns Xr mlock 2
wired memory is included in a process's footprint,
.Nm
will report it as dirty in both that process and
.Ar kernel_task .
This results in the second limitation: if
.Nm
is reporting on a user space process and
.Ar kernel_task
at the same time, the reported Summary value will incorrectly count
non-VM_KERN_MEMORY_MLOCK wired memory twice: once for the process and
once as part of the wired memory breakdown associated with
.Ar kernel_task .
.Pp
Together, these two limitations make the Summary TOTAL reported with
.Nm
.Fl -all
very unreliable compared to true total dirty memory.  The
.Qq System auxiliary data
described below is a better measure of total system footprint.
.Sh AUXILIARY DATA
.Nm
reports the following
.Qq Auxiliary data
for processes:
.Bl -inset -offset "1234"
.It Sy phys_footprint
- the current value of the kernel ledger tracking the amount of dirty memory owned by a process
.It Sy phys_footprint_peak
- the maximum value of
.Sy phys_footprint
since
.Ns process
launch
.El
.Pp
.Sq Nm Fl a
reports the following
.Qq System auxiliary data
.Bl -inset -offset "1234"
.It Sy boot_carveout
- memory allocated prior to kernel startup
.It Sy sys_wired
- total system wired memory
.It Sy sys_unwired
- total dirty unwired memory
.It Sy sys_footprint
- total of the above
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vmmap 1 ,
.Xr heap 1 ,
.Xr leaks 1 ,
.Xr malloc_history 1 ,
.Xr vm_stat 1 ,
.Xr zprint 1
