.\" Man page for cryptex plist keys
.TH CRYPTEX-PLIST-KEYS 5 "August 2025" "libcryptex" "File Formats Manual"
.SH NAME
cryptex-plist-keys \- Property list keys used in cryptex Info.plist

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual describes the property list (plist) keys used by the cryptex framework.

.SH CRYPTEX INFO.PLIST KEYS
These keys are used in the main Info.plist file of a cryptex and are processed by cryptexd during cryptex installation and mounting.

.SS Basic Identity Keys
.TP
.B CFBundleIdentifier
.I (string, required)
The unique identifier for the cryptex bundle. This follows reverse DNS notation (e.g., "com.example.mycryptex").

.TP
.B CFBundleVersion
.I (string, required)
The version string of the cryptex. Used for dependency resolution and upgrade management.

.TP
.B Name
.I (string, optional)
Human-readable name of the cryptex package.

.TP
.B Version
.I (string, optional)
Package version identifier (may differ from CFBundleVersion).

.TP
.B Publisher
.I (string, optional)
The entity responsible for publishing the cryptex.

.SS Mount Configuration Keys
.TP
.B NoCode
.I (boolean, optional)
When set to true, indicates the cryptex contains no executable code. Such cryptexes have restricted mount paths and cannot bootstrap any content.

.TP
.B RequiredMountPath
.I (string, optional)
Specifies a custom absolute path where the cryptex must be mounted. If not specified, the system will generate a temporary mount point. For NoCode cryptexes, only specific paths are permitted:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
/private/var/MLModels/
.IP \(bu 2
/private/var/run/com.apple.security.cryptexd/
.RE

.SS Bootstrap Configuration Keys
.TP
.B BootstrapContents
.I (array of strings, optional)
Specifies which types of content should be bootstrapped from the cryptex.
.B Important:
This key serves as a selective override mechanism rather than a comprehensive specification. Many content types are automatically enabled based on cryptex type and installation context.

.B Default Behavior:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B Always enabled:
"Service" and "Jetsam Properties" are automatically included for all cryptexes
.IP \(bu 2
.B System cryptex defaults:
"Log Profile" and "Feature Flags" are automatically enabled for system cryptexes
.IP \(bu 2
.B Session cryptex restrictions:
"Library", "Executable", "Factory", and "Log Profile" are disabled for session cryptexes
.IP \(bu 2
.B NoCode cryptex restrictions:
All bootstrap content is disabled for cryptexes marked with NoCode=true
.RE

.B Valid content type strings:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
"Service" - Bootstrap launchd services from Library/LaunchDaemons/ and Library/LaunchAgents/
.IP \(bu 2
"Library" - Create symlinks from cryptex libraries to system library paths (/usr/local/lib, etc.)
.IP \(bu 2
"Executable" - Create binary "trampolines" that redirect system calls to cryptex executables
.IP \(bu 2
"Factory" - Bootstrap diagnostic content (creates APFS Diags volume, enables LuaCore, Python, Astro content)
.IP \(bu 2
"Log Profile" - Bootstrap logging configuration files from Library/Preferences/Logging/Subsystems/
.IP \(bu 2
"Feature Flags" - Copy feature flag domain files from Library/Preferences/FeatureFlags/Domain/
.IP \(bu 2
"Jetsam Properties" - Load Jetsam memory management properties
.RE

.TP
.B DeveloperModeRequired
.I (boolean, optional)
When set to true, the cryptex can only be installed when the system is in developer mode.

.SS Command Execution Keys
.TP
.B OSCryptexExecCommand
.I (string, optional)
The main command to execute by cryptexctl exec.

.TP
.B OSCryptexExecCommandArguments
.I (array of strings, optional)
Command-line arguments to pass to the main command. This does not include `argv[0]`.

.TP
.B OSCryptexExecEnvironmentVariables
.I (dictionary, optional)
Environment variables to set when executing the main command.

.SS Dependencies and Security Keys
.TP
.B Dependencies
.I (array of dictionaries, optional)
Specifies cryptexes that this cryptex depends on. Each dependency is a dictionary containing:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
CFBundleIdentifier (string, required) - Bundle ID of the dependency
.IP \(bu 2
CFBundleVersion (string, optional) - Minimum required version
.RE
Maximum of 8 dependencies allowed.

.TP
.B LimitInstallToApps
.I (array of dictionaries, optional)
Restricts installation to specific applications. Each entry contains CFBundleIdentifier of an allowed app. Requires SecureConfigDB support and matching configuration. Maximum of 256 entries allowed.

.SH WATCHDOG CONFIGURATION KEYS
These keys are defined in the cryptex Info.plist but reference services that will be loaded from launchd plists within the cryptex.

.TP
.B Watchdog
.I (array of dictionaries, optional)
Configuration for service watchdog monitoring. Each dictionary contains:

.RS
.TP
.B Label
.I (string, required)
Service label that matches a launchd service within the cryptex.

.TP
.B ProcessName
.I (string, required)
Name of the process to monitor.

.TP
.B WatchdogMachService
.I (string, required)
Mach service name used for watchdog communication.

.TP
.B LateFirstCheckin
.I (boolean, optional)
Allow the service to check in late on first startup.

.TP
.B PanicOnFirstTimeout
.I (boolean, optional)
Trigger a system panic if the service times out on first startup.

.TP
.B CaptureDdtOnTimeout
.I (boolean, optional)
Capture diagnostic data (DDT) when the service times out.
.RE

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Info.plist
.nf
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN"
  "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
<dict>
    <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
    <string>com.example.mycryptex</string>
    <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
    <string>1.0.0</string>
    <key>BootstrapContents</key>
    <array>
        <string>Service</string>
        <string>Library</string>
    </array>
    <key>DeveloperModeRequired</key>
    <true/>
</dict>
</plist>
.fi

.SS Info.plist with Dependencies
.nf
<dict>
    <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
    <string>com.example.dependent</string>
    <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
    <string>2.0.0</string>
    <key>Dependencies</key>
    <array>
        <dict>
            <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
            <string>com.example.base</string>
            <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
            <string>1.5.0</string>
        </dict>
    </array>
</dict>
.fi

.SS Info.plist with Watchdog
.nf
<dict>
    <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
    <string>com.example.monitored</string>
    <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
    <string>1.0.0</string>
    <key>Watchdog</key>
    <array>
        <dict>
            <key>Label</key>
            <string>com.example.myservice</string>
            <key>ProcessName</key>
            <string>myservice</string>
            <key>WatchdogMachService</key>
            <string>com.example.myservice.watchdog</string>
            <key>LateFirstCheckin</key>
            <false/>
            <key>PanicOnFirstTimeout</key>
            <true/>
        </dict>
    </array>
</dict>
.fi

.SH ERRORS
Common errors when processing plist keys:
.TP
.B EBADPLIST_NP
Missing required keys (CFBundleIdentifier or CFBundleVersion)
.TP
.B EINVAL
Invalid dependency specifications or install limit configurations
.TP
.B ETOOMANYREFS
Too many dependencies (>8) or install limit entries (>256)
.TP
.B CRYPTEX_ERR_INVALID_INPUT
Malformed watchdog configurations or invalid content type specifications

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cryptex (1),
.BR cryptexctl (1),
.BR plist (5)

.SH HISTORY
The cryptex plist key system was introduced as part of the libcryptex framework for secure, authenticated filesystem extensions in Darwin-based systems.
